[libc++][hardening] Finish documenting hardening. (#92021)
llvm/llvm-project: libcxx/docs/Hardening.rst

  rigour impacts performance more than fast mode: we recommend benchmarking to
  determine if that is acceptable for your program.
- **Debug mode**, which enables all the available checks in the library,
  including heuristic checks that might have significant performance overhead as
  well as internal library assertions. This mode should be used in

>   non-production environments (such as test suites, CI, local development). We

Reviewer: I would expect an `or` here.
```suggestion
  non-production environments (such as test suites, CI, or local development). We
```

>   don’t commit to a particular level of performance in this mode and it’s *not*

Reviewer: I would start the text that it's not intended for production usage, that way the reader can skip this directly when looking for options suitable for production usage.

Author: I find it a little hard to rephrase without breaking the flow. I'd prefer mode descriptions to follow the consistent pattern where each paragraph begins with describing the enabled checks, followed by some additional remarks. I think the name `debug` already strongly implies it's not suitable for production use, and the paragraphs are relatively short, so I don't think it should cause any significant confusion to the reader.

>   *not* intended to be used in production.

Reviewer 2: Should we add:
> However, we do not change the _complexity_ of algorithms since satisfying the complexity of an algorithm is necessary for Standards conformance.

Or, if we don't want to commit to that, then we should mention the contrary. Either way, it seems like a nice place to document this design point.

Author: I strongly suspect that not changing the complexity is the right approach, but I'm still very slightly hesitant to commit to it at this point, given that our focus has been mainly on the fast mode and not on the debug mode. Do you think we could simply write that we're not sure although leaning towards not changing? Or should we only document decisions that we're pretty sure about, to avoid confusing our users?

Author: I think this is absolutely worth documenting, but I'd prefer to do it at a later point after we spend more time restoring feature parity with the old debug mode and become more confident that this is the right approach.

``LIBCXX_HARDENING_MODE`` as a configuration option, with the possible values of
``none``, ``fast``, ``extensive`` and ``debug``. The default value is ``none``
which doesn't enable any hardening checks (this mode is sometimes called the
``unchecked`` mode).

This option controls both the hardening mode that the precompiled library is
built with and the default hardening mode that users will build with. If set to
``none``, the precompiled library will not contain any assertions, and user code
will default to building without assertions.

Vendors can also override the termination handler by :ref:`providing a custom
header <override-assertion-handler>`.

Assertion categories
====================

Inside the library, individual assertions are grouped into different
*categories*. Each hardening mode enables a different set of assertion
categories; categories provide an additional layer of abstraction that makes it
easier to reason about the high-level semantics of a hardening mode.

- ``valid-element-access`` -- checks that any attempts to access a container
  element, whether through the container object or through an iterator, are

>   valid and do not attempt to go out of bounds or otherwise access

Reviewer: What is access in this context? `std::string::end()` is a valid iterator but can't be incremented nor deferred.
Does this check catch both cases?

Author: It's a very interesting point, but I think it starts going a little too much into technical detail; I'm primarily trying to express the main intention of each category, not list every kind of check exhaustively. Do you feel it's important enough to call out here?

Reviewer: Is there another place where the details of the tests are documented?

Author: Added a clarification:
> This also includes operations that set up an imminent invalid access (e.g. incrementing an end iterator).

Thanks for following up on this -- you convinced me that this is an important aspect to add.

  a non-existent element. For iterator checks to work, bounded iterators must be
  enabled in the ABI. Types like ``optional`` and ``function`` are considered

>   one-element containers for the purposes of this check.

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear. Is an `optional<int> foo` considered a container with one or zero elements? I would expect zero in this case.

Author: I guess the intended meaning is more like "at most one-element container" or "up to one element container". Would you prefer to make it explicit in the text?

- ``valid-input-range`` -- checks that ranges (whether expressed as an iterator
  pair, an iterator and a sentinel, an iterator and a count, or

>   a ``std::range``) given as input to library functions are valid:

Reviewer: Consistency, maybe use `std::optional` and `std::function` at the previous bullet point. Or remove change here to `range`.

  - the sentinel is reachable from the begin iterator;
  - TODO(hardening): both iterators refer to the same container.

>   ("input" here refers to "an input given to an algorithm", not to an iterator

Reviewer: Should we consider renaming `valid-input-range` to `valid-range-argument` to avoid the possible confusion?

Author: +1 -- I'll prepare a follow-up.

  category)

  Violating assertions in this category leads to an out-of-bounds access.

> - ``non-null`` -- checks that the pointer being dereferenced is not null. On

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``non-null`` -- checks that the pointer being dereferenced is not ``NULL``. On
```

Author: I think "null" has the advantage of being a general computer science term, whereas `NULL` is one way to express that concept in C++, so I'd prefer to keep the current wording.

>   most modern platforms zero address does not refer to an actual location in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  most modern platforms, zero address does not refer to an actual location in
```

>   most modern platforms zero address does not refer to an actual location in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  most modern platforms the zero address does not refer to an actual location in
```

>   most modern platforms zero address does not refer to an actual location in

Reviewer: This feels odd and I wonder how correct it is. My PC most definitively has an address zero, the OS does not let me access it; for good reasons. I would just mention that C++ does not allow deferring a NULL pointer. (Pedantic there is no requirement NULL is actually address zero.)

Author: This comes from a conversation with our internal security team, so I'd prefer to keep it as is.

>   memory, so a null pointer dereference would not compromize the memory security

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  memory, so a null pointer dereference would not compromise the memory security
```

  of a program (however, it is still undefined behavior that can result in
  strange errors due to compiler optimizations).

- ``non-overlapping-ranges`` -- for functions that take several ranges as

>   arguments, checks that the given ranges do not overlap.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  arguments, checks that those ranges do not overlap.
```

- ``valid-deallocation`` -- checks that an attempt to deallocate memory is valid
  (e.g. the given object was allocated by the given allocator). Violating this

>   category typically results in a memory leak.

Reviewer: Does this also validate `new / delete[]` and `new[] / delete` pairs?

Author: We don't have any checks like this at the moment (that I'm aware of), but I think this would be the right category to classify this kind of checks.

- ``valid-external-api-call`` -- checks that a call to an external API doesn't

>   fail in an unexpected manner. This includes triggering documented cases of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  fail in an unexpected manner. Failures include triggering documented cases of
```

  undefined behavior in an external library (like attempting to unlock an
  unlocked mutex in pthreads). Any API external to the library falls under this
  category (from system calls to compiler intrinsics). We generally don't expect

>   these failures to compromize memory safety or otherwise create an immediate

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  these failures to compromise memory safety or otherwise create an immediate
```

Author: Thanks! I actually didn't realize that `compromise` is always spelled in the British style.

  security issue.

- ``compatible-allocator`` -- checks any operations that exchange nodes between
  containers to make sure the containers have compatible allocators.

- ``argument-within-domain`` -- checks that the given argument is within the
  domain of valid arguments for the function. Violating this typically produces

>   an incorrect result (e.g. the clamp algorithm returns the original value

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  an incorrect result (e.g. ``std::clamp`` algorithm returns the original value
```

  without clamping it due to incorrect functors) or puts an object into an

>   invalid state (e.g. a string view where only a subset of elements is possible

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  invalid state (e.g. a string view where only a subset of elements
```

>   to access). This category is for assertions violating which doesn't cause any

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 acccessible). This category is for assertions violating which doesn't cause any
```

  immediate issues in the library -- whatever the consequences are, they will
  happen in the user code.

> - ``pedantic`` -- checks prerequisites that are imposed by the Standard, but

Reviewer: Please use the wording of the Standard.
```suggestion
- ``pedantic`` -- checks preconditions that are imposed by the Standard, but
```

Author: Thanks!

>   violating which happens to be benign in our implementation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  whose violation is benign in our implementation.
```

>   violating which happens to be benign in our implementation.

Reviewer: Do we really want to guarantee these violations are benign?

Author: Do you mean whether we guarantee this right now, or commit to this in future releases? For the current state, I think we should (or rather, assertions simply represent the current state of our implementation) -- in general, I think hardening should take every advantage of the fact that it's part of the library and can rely on implementation-specific details. For future releases, I don't intend this to mean we guarantee that the violations will necessarily remain benign, only that the assertion category would correspond to the actual implementation (in other words, if we change an algorithm and the violation is no longer benign, the corresponding assertion would have to be changed from `pedantic` to something else).

Reviewer: Guaranteed for the future too. Ideally we should adjust the category when an issue is not benign, but I expect this is likely to be forgotten; just from experience with how often documentation in code is outdated.

I also feel it's sometimes hard to determine whether an issue is really benign. For example, signed integer overflow can be benign or really bad.

Author: It's true that sometimes it may be difficult to determine, and we should err on the side of caution, but sometimes it's pretty clear (e.g. we explicitly check for a "bad" input and return). For an overflow, we should focus on the worst thing that could happen given how the result of the overflow is used. If it's used for indexing, this is _not_ a benign issue -- in general, the classification should focus on the consequences of the bug, not its "mechanism".

I don't see this category as a commitment for the future -- I think we can reclassify (as well as add or remove) any check in general (obviously we should aim to avoid any potential disruption for the users, but I think we would do both our users and ourselves a disservice if we commit to freeze the initial state of the first release).

IMO it's a very valid concern that this might become out of sync, but it applies to any assertion category. We should commit to making sure that the classification of our assertions is valid for the current state of the library. But I don't think it would make us any more future-proof we deliberately classify assertions as more severe than their actual effect. I also think that simply representing the current state is the easiest mental model to work with.

- ``semantic-requirement`` -- checks that the given argument satisfies the
  semantic requirements imposed by the Standard. Typically, there is no simple
  way to completely prove that a semantic requirement is satisfied; thus, this

>   would often be a heuristic check and it might be quite expensive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  check would require a heuristic analysis and it might be quite expensive.
```

- ``internal`` -- checks that internal invariants of the library hold. These
  assertions don't depend on user input.

> - ``uncategorized`` -- for assertions that haven't been properly classified yet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- ``uncategorized`` -- checks that assertions that haven't been properly classified yet are satisfied.
```

Reviewer 3: I do not feel strongly about this but I just wanted to drop you a note about why I flagged it: I just thought that there would be more parallelism with the other parts of the documentation. The discussion of each of the modes starts with `checks that` and so I thought I would flag it. 

Again, I do not feel strongly about it -- I just wanted to let you know so that I didn't seem that nit-picky!

Author: Thanks for explaining! To some extent, this is intentional -- this is kind of a stop-gap category (that wouldn't exist in a perfect world), so having it stick out a little and break the flow seems appropriate. So I'd slightly prefer to keep as is.

>   This is an escape hatch used for some existing assertions in the library; all

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  This category is an escape hatch used for some existing assertions in the library; all
```

  new code should have its assertions properly classified.

Mapping between the hardening modes and the assertion categories
================================================================

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: auto

>     * - Category name

Reviewer: Why do you not show this information in a table?

Author: I don't understand this comment -- perhaps you're looking at an older revision of this patch? The current state is a table (see [this link](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/blob/6a7c74517725d648c2a0fe38798aed1c3ba8490c/libcxx/docs/Hardening.rst)).

Reviewer: I see, my mistake. I'm used to a different markup for tables.

      - ``fast``
      - ``extensive``
      - ``debug``
    * - ``valid-element-access``
      - ✅
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``valid-input-range``
      - ✅
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``non-null``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``non-overlapping-ranges``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``valid-deallocation``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``valid-external-api-call``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``compatible-allocator``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``argument-within-domain``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``pedantic``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``semantic-requirement``
      - ❌
      - ❌
      - ✅
    * - ``internal``
      - ❌
      - ❌
      - ✅
    * - ``uncategorized``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅

.. note::

  At the moment, each subsequent hardening mode is a strict superset of the
  previous one (in other words, each subsequent mode only enables additional
  assertion categories without disabling any), but this won't necessarily be

>   true for any hardening modes that might potentially be added in the future.

Reviewer: The previous wording sound to me, that it would be very unlikely we ever add a new mode.
```suggestion
  true for any hardening modes that might be added in the future.
```

Author: When I was writing this, I was concerned not to give an impression like we have any concrete plans to add more modes (I'm not aware of any), but I don't have a strong preference here, so I'll go with your suggestion.

Hardening assertion failure
===========================

In production modes (``fast`` and ``extensive``), a hardening assertion failure

> immediately traps the program. This is the safest approach that also minimizes

Reviewer: I would like to see information what is meant with `traps`? It seems unlikely the reader is aware what this does.

Author: Added a link to the LLVM docs -- do you feel this addresses your concern?

the code size penalty as the failure handler maps to a single instruction. The
downside is that the failure provides no additional details other than the stack
trace (which might also be affected by optimizations).

TODO(hardening): describe ``__builtin_verbose_trap`` once we can use it.

In the ``debug`` mode, an assertion failure terminates the program in an
unspecified manner and also outputs the associated error message to the error

> output. This is less secure and increases the size of the binary (among other

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
output. This is less secure and increases the size of the binary (because, among other
```

> things, to store the error message strings) but makes the failure easier to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
things, it has to store the error message strings) but makes the failure easier to
```

> debug. It also allows us to test the error messages in our test suite.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
debug. This mode also allows libcxx developers the ability to test the error messages in their test suite.
```

.. _override-assertion-handler:

Overriding the assertion failure handler
----------------------------------------

Vendors can override the default termination handler mechanism by following

> these steps:

Reviewer: Is there a way for users to override the default? If not it would be good to mention this explicitly.

Author: It's a good point, but I find it a little hard to address. Just stating that "users cannot override this" doesn't seem to actually provide any additional information. Stating "users _shouldn't_ override this" (i.e., we not only don't provide this mechanism but also never intend to provide it because we don't think it's technically feasible/a good idea/etc.) might be true, but I don't feel I have thought about this to say that with complete confidence. Would you be okay to leave it as is for now?

Reviewer: I feel stating that "users cannot override this" does provide information. After reading that they can stop searching how they can override this. For me it makes it easier to point to the documentation when users post bug reports.

I was not aware users can't override this handle.

Author: Thanks for explaining, added. By the way, I just remembered it's mentioned in [P3191](https://isocpp.org/files/papers/P3191R0.pdf):
> First, under the strictest code size requirements, we do not allow users to redefine the contract violation handler. The contract violation handler is something that the vendor defines and is then baked in for all users. If the vendor wants to allow for the contract violation handler to be repleaceable, it can provide a contract violation handler that is repleaceable, but it is not required to.

  ``_LIBCPP_ASSERTION_HANDLER``. The macro will be invoked when a hardening
  assertion fails, with a single parameter containing a null-terminated string
  with the error message.
- when configuring the library, provide the path to custom header (relative to
  the root of the repository) via the CMake variable
  ``LIBCXX_ASSERTION_HANDLER_FILE``.

ABI
===

Setting a hardening mode does **not** affect the ABI. Each mode uses the subset
of checks available in the current ABI configuration which is determined by the
platform.

It is important to stress that whether a particular check is enabled depends on
the combination of the selected hardening mode and the hardening-related ABI
options. Some checks require changing the ABI from the "default" to store
additional information in the library classes -- e.g. checking whether an
iterator is valid upon dereference generally requires storing data about bounds
inside the iterator object. Using ``std::span`` as an example, setting the
hardening mode to ``fast`` will always enable the ``valid-element-access``
checks when accessing elements via a ``span`` object, but whether dereferencing

> a ``span`` iterator does the equivalent check depends on the ABI configuration.

Reviewer: Here you mix `std::span` and `span`.

Author: Done. FWIW, it's actually intentional (I use the full name the first time the "term" is introduced, then switch to using a shorter name presuming it's now clear to the reader which `span` the text is referring to), but I don't have a very strong preference here.

ABI options
-----------

Vendors can use the following ABI options to enable additional hardening checks:

- ``_LIBCPP_ABI_BOUNDED_ITERATORS`` -- changes the iterator type of select
  containers (see below) to a bounded iterator that keeps track of whether it's

>   within the bounds of the original container and asserts it on every

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  within the bounds of the original container and asserts valid bounds on every
```

  dereference.

  ABI impact: changes the iterator type of the relevant containers.

  Supported containers:
  - ``span``;
  - ``string_view``.

ABI tags
--------

We use ABI tags to allow translation units built with different hardening modes
to interact with each other without causing ODR violations. Knowing how
hardening modes are encoded into the ABI tags might be useful to examine
a binary and determine whether it was built with hardening enabled.

.. warning::
  We don't commit to the ABI tags being stable between different releases of
  libc++. The following describes the state of the latest release and is for

>   informational purposes only.

Reviewer: I think it would be good to mention they will not be stable. The ABI tag contains the libc++ version number.

Author: Added, and also rephrased a little to make it clear that the text is referring to the encoding scheme used by the tags.

The first character of an ABI tag encodes the hardening mode:

- ``f`` -- [f]ast mode;
- ``s`` -- extensive ("[s]afe") mode;
- ``d`` -- [d]ebug mode;
- ``n`` -- [n]one mode.

Hardened containers status
==========================

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: auto

>     * - Name

Reviewer: Here too I feel a table would be easier to convey the information.

Author: Same -- this should already be a table, unless I'm missing something.

      - Member functions
      - Iterators (ABI-dependent)
    * - ``span``
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``string_view``
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``array``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``vector``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``string``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``list``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``forward_list``
      - ❌
      - ❌
    * - ``deque``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``mdspan``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``optional``

>       - ✅

Reviewer: I miss
- `map`, `set`, and their multi and unordered parts. (we don't have the flat ones)
- `valarray`
- `bitset` (this has no iterators, but has an index operation.
- the container adapters, `stack`, `queue` and `priority_queue`
- `function` was listed above
- what about `variant`, `any`, and `expected`?

Author: Thanks! Would you be okay if I do this in an (immediate) follow-up?

Reviewer: yes that would be fine by me.

      - N/A

TODO(hardening): make this table exhaustive.

Testing
=======

Each hardening assertion should be tested using death tests (via the
``TEST_LIBCPP_ASSERT_FAILURE`` macro). Use the ``libcpp-hardening-mode`` Lit
feature to make sure the assertion is enabled in (and only in) the intended
modes. Note that error messages are only tested (matched) if the ``debug``

> hardening mode is used.

Reviewer: Maybe point to an example test or write a short example.

Author: Thanks! Added a short example -- I'm concerned a link might become stale.

Notes for vendors
-----------------

Vendors can set the default hardening mode by providing
``LIBCXX_HARDENING_MODE`` as a configuration option, with the possible values of
``none``, ``fast``, ``extensive`` and ``debug``. The default value is ``none``
which doesn't enable any hardening checks (this mode is sometimes called the
``unchecked`` mode).

This option controls both the hardening mode that the precompiled library is
built with and the default hardening mode that users will build with. If set to
``none``, the precompiled library will not contain any assertions, and user code
will default to building without assertions.

> Vendors can also override the termination handler by :ref:`providing a custom
> header <override-assertion-handler>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Vendors can also override the way the program is terminated when an assertion fails by :ref:`providing a custom
header <override-assertion-handler>`.
```

Assertion categories
====================

Inside the library, individual assertions are grouped into different
*categories*. Each hardening mode enables a different set of assertion
categories; categories provide an additional layer of abstraction that makes it

> easier to reason about the high-level semantics of a hardening mode.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add:
> Users are not intended to interact with these categories directly -- the categories are considered internal to the library and subject to change.

Author: Added as a note.

  fail in an unexpected manner. This includes triggering documented cases of
  undefined behavior in an external library (like attempting to unlock an
  unlocked mutex in pthreads). Any API external to the library falls under this
  category (from system calls to compiler intrinsics). We generally don't expect
  these failures to compromise memory safety or otherwise create an immediate
  security issue.

- ``compatible-allocator`` -- checks any operations that exchange nodes between
  containers to make sure the containers have compatible allocators.

- ``argument-within-domain`` -- checks that the given argument is within the
  domain of valid arguments for the function. Violating this typically produces
  an incorrect result (e.g. ``std::clamp`` returns the original value without
  clamping it due to incorrect functors) or puts an object into an invalid state
  (e.g. a string view where only a subset of elements is accessible). This
  category is for assertions violating which doesn't cause any immediate issues
  in the library -- whatever the consequences are, they will happen in the user
  code.

- ``pedantic`` -- checks preconditions that are imposed by the Standard, but

>   violating which happens to be benign in our implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  violating which happens to be benign in libc++.
```

I think this reads better from the POV of a user.

================================================================

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: auto

    * - Category name
      - ``fast``
      - ``extensive``
      - ``debug``
    * - ``valid-element-access``
      - ✅
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``valid-input-range``
      - ✅
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``non-null``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``non-overlapping-ranges``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``valid-deallocation``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``valid-external-api-call``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``compatible-allocator``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``argument-within-domain``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``pedantic``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``semantic-requirement``
      - ❌
      - ❌
      - ✅
    * - ``internal``
      - ❌
      - ❌
      - ✅
    * - ``uncategorized``
      - ❌
      - ✅
      - ✅

.. note::

  At the moment, each subsequent hardening mode is a strict superset of the
  previous one (in other words, each subsequent mode only enables additional
  assertion categories without disabling any), but this won't necessarily be

>   true for any hardening modes that might be added in the future.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add:

> Furthermore, the categories enabled by each mode are subject to change and users should not rely on the precise assertions enabled by a mode at a given point in time. However, the libraries does guarantee to keep the hardening modes stable and to fulfill the semantics documented here.

Hardening assertion failure
===========================

In production modes (``fast`` and ``extensive``), a hardening assertion failure
immediately ``_traps <https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html#llvm-trap-intrinsic>``
the program. This is the safest approach that also minimizes the code size
penalty as the failure handler maps to a single instruction. The downside is
that the failure provides no additional details other than the stack trace
(which might also be affected by optimizations).

TODO(hardening): describe ``__builtin_verbose_trap`` once we can use it.

In the ``debug`` mode, an assertion failure terminates the program in an
unspecified manner and also outputs the associated error message to the error

> output. This is less secure and increases the size of the binary (among other
> things, it has to store the error message strings) but makes the failure easier

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
output. This is less secure and increases the size of the binary (since it has to store the error messages inside the compiled binary) but makes the failure easier
```

Author: Hmm, in addition to storing messages, the whole mechanism used to output error messages can increase the code size (additional instructions to do the output, plus the fact that we're doing a function call which might not always be inlined). Do you think we should ignore that for the purposes of this section?

Reviewer 2: I think your current formulation is acceptable. I initially had trouble parsing it cause I missed the beginning of the `(` but I think status quo is fine.

> to debug. It also allows us to test the error messages in our test suite.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to debug. It also allows testing the error messages in our test suite.
```

.. _override-assertion-handler:

Overriding the assertion failure handler
----------------------------------------

Vendors can override the default termination handler mechanism by following

> these steps:

Reviewer 2: Let's try to avoid calling it a termination handler since there's a thing called `std::terminate_handler`. Let's say "the default assertion handling mechanism" or something like that.

Author: That's a really good point.

- create a header file that provides a definition of a macro called
  ``_LIBCPP_ASSERTION_HANDLER``. The macro will be invoked when a hardening
  assertion fails, with a single parameter containing a null-terminated string
  with the error message.
- when configuring the library, provide the path to custom header (relative to
  the root of the repository) via the CMake variable

>   ``LIBCXX_ASSERTION_HANDLER_FILE``.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this is the right place to mention that the assertion handler gets included everywhere, so there must not be dependencies on other parts of the library in that header.

Author: Done. Should we mention that `__config` is an exception? (Not sure if we're okay with vendors including it since it's a private header)

Reviewer 2: We could say `should not include anything non trivial` to keep things somewhat vague. I'm also fine with mentioning `__config` directly, it just seems a bit too restrictive to prevent including anything else (since several headers don't have a dependency on the handler). Basically I think the intent we should go for is to warn vendors about the potential for circular deps and then let them figure out something that works.

Author: Went with `should not include anything non trivial` (it seems easy enough to use the default header as an example and notice that it does include `__config`).

> There is no existing mechanism for users to override the termination handler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is no existing mechanism for users to override the termination handler, however a vendor who wishes to provide this capability is free to do so, such as by declaring the assertion handler as an overridable function.
```

This would also be a good place to say something like:
> This is done because the ability to override the assertion handler other than at configure-time creates a code size tradeoff that may not be suitable in all cases. Instead, we let vendors decide what's right on their platform for their users.

Author: Added (with some rephrasing).

- ``_LIBCPP_ABI_BOUNDED_ITERATORS`` -- changes the iterator type of select
  containers (see below) to a bounded iterator that keeps track of whether it's
  within the bounds of the original container and asserts valid bounds on every
  dereference.

  ABI impact: changes the iterator type of the relevant containers.

  Supported containers:
  - ``span``;
  - ``string_view``.

ABI tags
--------

We use ABI tags to allow translation units built with different hardening modes
to interact with each other without causing ODR violations. Knowing how
hardening modes are encoded into the ABI tags might be useful to examine
a binary and determine whether it was built with hardening enabled.

.. warning::
  We don't commit to the encoding scheme used by the ABI tags being stable
  between different releases of libc++. The tags themselves are never stable, by
  design -- new releases increase the version number. The following describes
  the state of the latest release and is for informational purposes only.

The first character of an ABI tag encodes the hardening mode:

- ``f`` -- [f]ast mode;
- ``s`` -- extensive ("[s]afe") mode;
- ``d`` -- [d]ebug mode;

> - ``n`` -- [n]one mode.

Reviewer 2: I am worried that this is going to become stale very quickly.

I do agree it is useful for users to be able to know the configuration they're looking at. I'm conflicted between keeping this section and removing it.

Author: I do share this concern. I tried to stress that in the warning note, do you think emphasizing this even more would help?

Hardened containers status
==========================

.. list-table::
    :header-rows: 1
    :widths: auto

    * - Name
      - Member functions
      - Iterators (ABI-dependent)
    * - ``span``
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``string_view``
      - ✅
      - ✅
    * - ``array``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``vector``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``string``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``list``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``forward_list``
      - ❌
      - ❌
    * - ``deque``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``mdspan``
      - ✅
      - ❌
    * - ``optional``
      - ✅
      - N/A

> TODO(hardening): make this table exhaustive.

Reviewer 2: IMO we should add the containers we know we're missing (Mark's comment above) and resolve this TODO immediately, in this patch. Unless that change ends up being large and we want to decouple it?

Author: Done.

Some of these are a little tricky:
- We do have some hardening in `valarray`, I can't immediately say if it covers everything or not. Went with a conservative "partial";
- I'm not sure how much hardening we need in tree-based containers since they don't provide direct access to memory. Once again, I conservatively state that they are not hardened (in the sense that there are no interesting hardening checks there)
- re. `any` and `variant` -- is it possible to use those incorrectly without getting a guaranteed exception?

> Testing

Reviewer 2: I think this should move to the `Contributing` documentation somewhere. This doesn't really belong in the user-facing documentation.

Author: Moved to `TestingLibcxx.rst`. I left a link in this doc, please let me know if you'd rather remove it (I think it might be helpful to consolidate all information related to hardening in one place).
